---
layout: post
title: Reading again
---

Recently I decided to pick up a reading habit once again. The impending arrival of the holidays gave me the impression that I would probably have plenty of free time -- perfect for establishing routines and habits to better myself before the next school term commenced. 

So I delved into reading. I dug up my booklists on my somewhat neglected Goodreads account, searched up some book recommendations on Reddit and downloaded a few e-books from my trusty e-reader Libby. 

Getting into a book always entails taking a risk. In a sense, picking a book to read is like selecting a companion, one whom you'll turn to for solace and company throughout your journey over the next few weeks. You'll be spending so much time together that it's essential you're compatible; otherwise, you'll end up slogging through the entire process, emerging with nothing but frustration and a growing ennui for reading.

On another note, I think it's perfectly alright to abandon this "companion" of yours if you're really not hitting it off. Indulging in boring books is simply you falling prey to the sunk cost fallacy. Reading should never be an arduous process -- your time spent toiling through an uninteresting story can always be better spent on more meaningful ones that engage you. 

With this mindset, I've ended up abandoning quite a few books (e.g. The Elegant Universe by Brian Greene). But in that "sacrifice" I've also discovered many gems -- some hidden, some renowned -- which have often left me either reeling in awe, or musing over enlightening ideas. One of such which I found particularly impactful would be The Bell Jar by Sylvia Plath (I finished it last week and I still haven't fully taken it in); another would be The Biggest Bluff by Maria Konnikova (learning about poker and our inherent irrationalities as humans was pretty interesting). But it takes a while to really get into a book and be fully absorbed in it; finding a book that appeals is not easy, and does require lots of "risk-taking" and exploration.

Finding a "good book", however, is only the first step in establishing a reading habit. Consistency in reading is the second, and probably the most difficult part. It's essential to build a reading routine, to make reading a mindless, almost automatic action. But the presence of other forms of entertainment often abet a disregard for books and an addiction to stimulation beyond dull, immobile characters on a blank background. 

I've realised that I tend to get into "reading stints": once in a while, I'll be struck by a sudden, inexplicable desire to pick up a book, and for the next few weeks I'll read vocariously. At the start of 2021, I had a grand plan to complete 21 books this year (which tabulates to slightly less than 2 books a month, a relatively reasonable goal); that was probably what prompted by first reading spurt of 2021, where I completed 3 books over the span of two weeks. But everything died down soon after. When the school term began, I still found pockets of time to read -- on the MRT rides to school, waiting times while queuing for food -- but my dedication had begun fading. This, coupled with how hard it was for me to find a book that could captivate me long enough, gradually eroded my interest in books. The act of reading soon ceased to exist in my daily life, and I barely noticed it either, being too engrossed in other lowest-common-denominator-catering forms of entertainment.

To be clear, I think there's nothing wrong with "modern" entertainment -- social media, YouTube, Netflix and their ilk. I simply think reading can be much more meaningful at times: you're entering a world someone else meticulously stitched together, meeting new people with diverse personalities and worldviews (albeit not actually being able to meet them), gaining new insights from situations you would never otherwise find yourself in. For example, learning about Maria Konnikova's journey from a poker novice to playing at the PokerStars Carribean Adventure Hold'em Championships gave me a first-hand understanding of how professional players made rational, probabilitistic decisions even under high stakes, something which I found quite relevant to improving my decision-making skills and overcoming my irrationalities in thinking. Seeing the world of 1960s America from the eyes of 8-year-old Scout Finch enlightened me about the prevalence of racism back then (and till today), and I was also deeply inspired by Atticus Finch to work towards congruence in my character.

Books are a whole world of wonder, concealed within lines of abstract characters and binds of crinkled pages. Approach them with a curious, eager mind, and leave them with a feeling of amazement. My insights from reading have shaped me in some way or another; it's scary to think about who I would be in the absence of such valuable companionship. To end off, here's a quote that summarizes my entire sentiments towards books, towards reading:

>> “I cannot remember the books I've read any more than the meals I have eaten; even so, they have made me.” ― Ralph Waldo Emerson
