---
layout: post
title: On isolation
---

A week back we went full-on into Home-Based Learning (HBL). For most of my friends it was a cause for despair; the prospects of being remaining confined to home for the upcoming weeks seemed to be akin to a prison sentence. 

I think dreading isolation is fully understandable. We thrive off social interaction. Simply seeing others' faces and meeting physically with others is enough to grant us a sense of belonging, a sense of being included in a community of some sorts. Personally, I believe nothing can beat IRL interactions. For some reason I've always found reading non-verbal cues in a conversation to be very reassuring; it seriously grants a personal touch that I've discovered is irreplicable on Skype or Discord calls with friends. Reverting back to Phase 2 and HBL inevitably implies an extended deprivation of these personal connections, and a necessary corollary is the isolation, the loneliness that haunts us.

But I sometimes can't help but think that our fear of being alone is pretty unfounded. Perhaps this fear stems from us constantly being connected -- on social media, receiving live updates on our friends' cafe-hopping adventures or urban exploration trips -- to the extent that we simply can't go without knowing what's going on with others. 

Perhaps we've grown so accustomed to it that we feel **compelled** to stay involved, to stay connected, without truly questioning what the purpose of it all even is.

My point being: we're so driven by a desire for social connectivity that any other alternatives have become something to dread. But how difficult is it, really, to find satisfaction in being alone?

As a caveat, I'm an introvert, so my opinions should probably be taken with a pinch of salt. But I've found the past two weeks at home to be surprisingly  therapeutic. From my friends' lamenting, it was clear that the initial boredom was stifling for most. Yet, perhaps it was this exact isolation that taught me to be comfortable with boredom. I made it a challenge for myself to consciously stay off social media (the fact that this was even a challenge is honestly worrying), and find time to just be with myself. I found the space to be with my thoughts, to be introspective, to dig deep and discover more about myself. Diving into my inner world served to keep me occupied; I found myself pursuing longer trains of thought and pondering over my observations for just a bit longer than I usually did.

I acknowledge that all of this sounds a bit abstract. To be fair, I'm not sure how interesting one's thoughts can really be for everyone. But I genuinely believe that it's important to disconnect from time to time and practise being comfortable with boredom. 

Being in solitude was rejuvenating. In all honesty, in the days leading up to HBL, I was struggling to breathe. Dealing with the intricacies of relationships and social constructs had gradually been overwhelming me; being immersed in work, surrounded by people 24/7 was becoming exhausting. It was only when I found myself back in the comfort of my room, listening to lessons on Microsoft Teams that I suddenly felt at peace. I hadn't realised it up till then, but I had been desperately in need of a recharge, and the announcement of HBL couldn't have come at a more opportune time.

Tomorrow marks the commencement of the holidays: one that is likely to be spent in solitude (given the restrictions on dining out and the two-person limit on group sizes). Perhaps it is a cause for despair. But perhaps it is something to be grateful for -- the potential for self exploration and introspection can be much more rewarding than you perceive it to be. 


